---
title:  "Character encodings: ASCII, UTF-8, Unicode and what is Latin-1?"
date:   2021-11-03 16:36:48 +0100
categories: encoding engineering computer-science
---

## UTF-16

In the early days of Unicode a 2 byte encoding called UCS-2 was proposed. This
allowed for 65 536 code points to be encoded, which is enough for plane 0, the
Basic Multiligual Plane, or BMP. This is good, but not complete. Luckily there
were a few unused ranges that could be used in a smart way so that more than
one million code points could be representedl, and that gives birth to UTF-16.

UCS-2 did not use the range `0xD800` to `0xDFFF` (55 296 to 57 343, in
decimal), which means that a total of 2048 values were not used. These
available values could be arranged in pairs, called surrogate pairs, resulting
in 4 bytes per code point. The first 1024 available values always formed the
first 16-bit part and the last 1024 formed the 16-bit part. As a result a total
of 1 048 576 extra code points can be represented.

The result is something like this:
- Code points from `0x0` to `0xFFFF` are encoded by their actual values.
- Starting from `0x10000` (which is the next number after `0xFFFF`) the code
  point is represented by a surrogate pair.
- The range `0xD800` to `0xDBFF` is called the "high surrogate".
- The range `0xDC00` to `0xDFFF` is called the "low surrogate".
- Get the code point that needs to be represented by a surrogate pair and
  subtract 0x10000.
- The highest code point number possible, in decimal, is 1 112 064. That, minus
  `0x10000` (65 536, in decimal) is 1 046 528. Juuuust enough! This can be
  represented in 20 bits (2 ^ 20 = 1 048 576).
- The first 10 bits are added to the high surrogate, and the last 10 bits are
  added to the low surrogate.
- The high and the low 10-bit values are in the range `0x000`–`0x3FF`.


☃, snowman character, U+2603:
U+2603 < U+FFFF, hence, simply use the code point number
0x26 0x03

🍑, peach, U+1F351
U+1F351 > U+FFFF, hence, a surrogate pair is needed.
```
0x1F351 - 0x10000 = 0xF351

Split 0xF351 in 2 groups of 10 bits
0x0F351=        00 0011 1100        11 0101 0001
0xD800 = 1101 0100 0000 0000
0xDC00 =                     1101 1100 0000 0000
         1101 0100 0011 1100 1101 1111 0101 0001 = 0xD83C 0xDF51
```


## BOM – Byte Order Mark

TODO
